Canada 
 
●​ Constitution 
○​ Canada had already been largely an independent country for the majority of its 
history. 
○​ 1867 - The BNA Act unified a large part of Canada together. 
■​ Britain would sign the papers because of the King-Byng Affair. 
○​ However, for decades, Canada still was uniquely reliant on Britain. It had to get 
approval on major laws from the British Parliament. This created an almost “blind 
rubber stamp” system. Some laws Canada required Britain to authorize included 
■​ 1870 Manitoba Act 
■​ 1871 British Columbia Act 
■​ 1898 Yukon Act 
■​ 1905 Saskatchewan Act 
■​ 1905 Alberta Act 
■​ 1915 - Canadian Senate Expansion 
■​ 1960 - Law ending Lifetime Tenure of Canadian Judges 
■​ 1975 - Northwest Territories given additional MP seat 
○​ A strange position for a Middle Power country in the world to be in to require 
approval from a former Colonial empire. 
 
●​ Trudeau’s Challenge 
○​ Pierre Trudeau was Prime Minister of Canada for a long time! 
■​ 1968-1979 (Winning 3 elections) 
■​ Defeat from 1979-1980. 
■​ Reelection from 1980-1984. 
■​ (Resigned in 1984 shortly before the next election) 
○​ For Years after being elected in 1968 Trudeau tried to change our constitution. 
■​ Many other PMs had tried and failed before him. 
○​ It was the perfect time for the talk as Canada’s constitution, the 1867 BNA Act 
had just reached the ripe old age of 100. 
○​ It didn’t work for many years as the provinces couldn’t come together for an 
agreement (Quebec being the largest not in favor) 
 
●​ Charter Goals 
○​ Guarantee the rights of individuals 
○​ Expand rights of minorities 
○​ Expand rights of legal system defendants 
○​ Hold government responsible to the courts 
○​ Centralize and Unify Canada, strengthening Canadian Identity 
○​ Remove last remains of British power over Canada 
○​ Points 3 and 4 are why Quebec and other provinces oppose charter.  
■​ Rene Levesque is the only premier that didn’t sign the charter.  
○​ Amending Formula 

■​ 7/50 
●​ 7 provinces and 50% of the population. 
●​ The provinces aren’t in a straight unison (not everyone is 
conservative) 
 
●​ Constitution Act & Charter of Rights and Freedoms is Signed 
○​ On April 17th, 1982, Queen Elizabeth II and Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau sign 
the constitution Act to make the Charter of Rights and Freedoms and Canadian 
sovereignty official 
 
●​ Charter of Rights and Freedoms 
○​ Fundamental Freedoms 
■​ Religion, Thought and Speech, Peaceful Demonstrations and Protests, 
and Right to Assemble) 
■​ Democratic Rights (Voting rights, government gathering) 
■​ Mobility Rights (Enter, Remain in and Leave Canada, travel in Canada) 
■​ Legal Rights (Against unreasonable search and seizure, fair treatment in 
court, protection against unreasonable laws, against unlawful arrests, 
rights after arrest and in court) 
■​ Equality Rights (same treatment regardless of race, nationality, ethnicity, 
colour, religion, sex, age, mental or physical exceptionality, sexual 
orientation, residency, marital status or citizenship) 
■​ Official Language Rights 
 
●​ Comparison to USA 
○​ Canada 
■​ Is not absolute 
■​ It has limitations and notwithstanding clauses by provincial governments. 
■​ Has larger scope of protected freedom of speech. 
■​ Has a small but significant number of times Charter Rights have 
seemingly been violated and upheld by provincial courts under the 
Notwithstanding Clause (this is increased in recent history) 
○​ USA 
■​ Is absolute (What is written will always be guaranteed) 
■​ The First Amendment actually protects slightly less free speech as 
political demonstrations can be considered disruptive and this is not 
protected under the freedom of speech. 
■​ Individual states have no ability to go against the Constitution.  
 
●​ How it changed Canada 
○​ Through interpretation of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms by the Supreme 
Court of Canada. 
■​ Protect accused people from having to disprove presumptions of guilt 
(1986 Supreme Court Oakes Case) 

■​ The Crown is required to disclose information to defense (1991 Supreme 
Court Stinchcombe case) 
■​ Women have reproductive rights that protect abortion (1988 Supreme 
Court Charter Section 7 Guarantee) 
■​ Protect LGBTQ from discrimination (1998 Supreme COurt Vriend 
Decision) 
●​ This paves the way for the 2005 legalization of same-sex 
marriage. 
■​ Protect Indigenous treaty rights (1990 Supreme Court Sparrow Decision) 
 
Soviet Union and the Berlin Wall 
 
●​ Overview 
○​ The Berlin wall was a concrete wall and heavily fortified border that was 
constructed to divide East and West Berlin from 1961 to 1989. 
○​ It is seen as a major symbol of the cold war. 
■​ Most major physical thing that exemplifies the divide between the Soviets 
and the Western powers. Free travel was not allowed 
○​ Originally East and West Berliners would travel freely from one side to another, 
however, due to the large number of East Berliners that migrated to the West, the 
wall was built to keep them in. 
■​ Educated, power, money, skills​
East Berlin coined it the “Anti-Fascist Protective Wall” to attempt to 
prevent influence from the capitalist democratic West. 
 
●​ Sub-divided within each side, based on the Western power. 
 
●​ The wall itself 
○​ The wall was a complex system of barriers including fences, barbed wire, guard 
towers and minefields. 
○​ Death strip – land between the two walls heavily guarded, preventing anyone 
from crossing.  
○​ President Regean gives speech “Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this WALL” 
 
●​ Life in East Berlin 
○​ The people of East Berlin were stuck: 
■​ They faced limited freedoms 
■​ Economic disparities 
■​ Constant surveillance 
■​ Housing shortages 
■​ Restricted consumer goods 
■​ A lower overall standard of living. 
 
●​ Connections with Canada 

○​ The collapse of the USSR in 1991 had a significant impact on Canada as the 
international landscape shifted. No longer were all division between that of the 
“two teams” that we’ve come to know in the 3rd unit. 
○​ The end of the USSR creates 15 independent states 
○​ Canada extends international relations with newly independent nations like 
Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia.  
○​ Canada is the first Western Nation to recognize Ukraine as an independent 
nation. 
■​ Canada has a large Ukrainian immigrant population. 
○​ After the cold war, Canada dials back on it’s military and instead focuses on 
military cooperation and peace keeping. 
○​ The collapse of the USSR leads to a wave of immigration from Eastern Europe to 
Canadian including many Russian-speaking Jewish immigrants 
○​ Canada further establishes its role as a middle power as it plays a more active 
role in international organizations like the United Nations.​  
■​ This is seen with the Canada UN peacekeeping forces in Yugoslavia, 
Somalia and Rwanda. 
 
Oka Crisis 
 
 
●​ What was the Oka Crisis? 
○​ The Oka Crisis was a 78-day standoff in 1990 between Mohawk protestors, 
police and later the Canadian armed forces over the expansion of a golf course 
onto disputed land near the Mohawk community of Kanesatake and the town of 
Oka. Tear gas, police killed. A piece of land the town wants to bulldoze for a golf 
course. 
●​ What was the main cause of the Oka Crisis in 1990? What specific event triggered 
the conflict? 
○​ The expansion of a golf course onto disputed land near the Mohawk community 
of Kanesatake and the town of Oka. They were peacefully protesting it originally, 
however that stopped as the town showed signs of stopping the expansion plans. 
The specific event that triggered the conflict was the attempted enforcement of a 
road blockade by the provincial police, which resulted in the shooting death of a 
police officer, Corporal Marcel Lemay.  
●​ How long was the standoff and how would you describe the relationship between 
the Mohawk protestors, Quebec police, the RCMP and the Canadian army? 
○​ 78 days. When they were peacefully protesting, nobody cared about their 
concerns. There were shooting guns and tear gas with no care that children were 
there. They didn’t do anything when everything was peaceful, now they are doing 
something? Their relationship was one of conflict and opposition with the 
Mohawk protestors resisting the encroachment of their land and cultural heritage. 
There were blood baths, and officers died. Started shooting people to gain 
control. Physical, violent. 5 Mohawks were convicted, 1 was arrested. 

●​ How have Indigenous people worked following the Oka Crisis to support and 
regain their culture? 
○​ They have regained their culture through cultural revitalization, focusing on their 
cultural traditions. They wanted to become more connected, so they created a 
book to support their oral history. Children were able to understand about their 
children, and more about what happened during the Oka Crisis. Understanding 
what they had gone through in the past helped them understand the present.  
○​ Many survivors needed strength from within, they needed to move on. They 
didn’t want to be considered anybody’s victim.  
○​ Their sports, they wanted to show what Native people can do. 
○​ Make it easier for the next generation. 
●​ What were some of the long-term impacts of the Oka Crisis on the relations 
between Indigenous peoples and the Canadian government? How did the 
Canadian government respond to similar events to Oka. 
○​ Many people still have anger. They will never trust the police and are still scared 
to travel. Full social breakdown of their community, political, economic, social, 
etc. When the barricades came down, the people were divided. Children were not 
sure of their history, so they created a book in their community that shares all 
their history. It united them all. 
○​ Throwing rocks at Mohawk people’s cars, and the police did nothing to stop 
them. 
○​ If they can’t come to a deal, then they have to go to court and other stuff, and 
then they start realizing. 
○​ First Nations people over BC showed their defiance against the government and 
started barricading roads as they wanted to protect their burial grounds. Police 
were ending the protests aggressively and kept arresting. 
○​ Johnny Jones scared the crew saying the spirits were mad and then they left. 
○​ They now have to consult with them before making the roads or trails or 
whatever. However the social conditions haven’t improved, rendering it a large 
issue.  
○​ They started apologizing and stuff 
○​ Inspired by Oka, many First Nations introduced traditional councils alongside 
Indian Act band councils, reinforcing self-determination PMC. 
○​ They have learned during the Oka crisis. It needed to shake the country of its 
foundations to understand that Native and Indigenous issues are very important. 
○​ They appointed a full royal commission for the aboriginal peoples of this country. 
■​ This started the TRC. 
●​ How does the film connect the events of the Oka Crisis to broader issues of 
Indigenous rights and land claims in Canada? What events have you learned 
about that you can connect the Oka Crisis with? 
○​ In The Oka Legacy, Sonia Bonspille-Boileau situates the 1990 standoff as both a 
culmination of—and response to—a continuum of colonial policies designed to 
dispossess Indigenous peoples of land, culture, and autonomy. The film weaves 
archival footage and contemporary testimony to draw direct lines from the 1876 

Indian Act through residential schools, the Sixties Scoop, Inuit relocations, forced 
sterilizations, and assimilationist White Paper proposals, all of which set the 
stage for the Mohawk defence of “The Pines” at Oka The Canadian Encyclopedia 
Government of Canada. 
○​ It reminds me of the Ipperwash Crisis of 1995 as they still killed lots of people.  
 
 
The Internet 
 
 
●​ The Beginning 
○​ The very first computers connected to each other and sending information were 
created first in 1965 via telephone then 1969 by Arpanet. 
○​ The first internet protocol or IP was used on January 1, 1983 
○​ An internet that has similarities to the one we use today first began in 1989 when 
computer scientist Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web (WWW) 
○​ By 1994, the internet had 10 million users worldwide and by the late 90s had 
become widely popular in many households.  
○​ Many people didn’t have the internet  
○​ Before google, the largest search engine was “Ask Jeeves” 
○​ Then we go to google, and then youtube 
○​ Internet was like a whole event. 
●​ Rapid Growth 
○​ All of our technology is now closely related. Computers are expected to access 
the internet, and we have computers integrated into everyday aspects of our life 
such as our Phones, Cars, TVs, watches and even our fridges. 
●​ Economically 
○​ Businesses started to capitalize on the growing success of the internet. 
○​ This changed the market and what companies people were investing their money 
in. 
○​ People were excited they invested in everything. 
○​ This eventually caused the .com bubble. 
